EXCELLENCE IN INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH - GUIDEPOSTS
STANLEY O. FOSTER MD, MPH1

PREFACE
Achievements in international health can never be attributed to one individual or one organization.   Successes result from the collaborative effort of all members of the team: families, communities, health workers, NGOs, colleagues, governments and partner organizations.
As I reflect on the privilege of working globally since 1964, I see 10 guideposts that have helped me along the way.  I share them in the hope that they will help current and future global health advocates to address the unacceptable inequities that exist in our global village.

1. MENTORS
Search out mentors.  As I look back over 69 years, I see the faces of individuals who listened to me, inspired me, guided me, and encouraged me: my parents, an uncle in public health, great teachers, and Alexander Langmuir at CDC.  The admonition of Yemi Ademola (Nigeria's Deputy Chief Medical Officer) to "stop being American or you are going home" helped sensitize me to differences in culture. In my years at Emory, my mentors have included both faculty and students. You are never too old to benefit from mentoring.
Search out mentors who have the values you respect, the time to listen, and the willingness to share in your struggles.
Remember your responsibility of mentoring the young who will carry on the fight for equity and social justice in the years ahead.  

2. FAITH
Working with the poor is difficult and, at times, dangerous.  Understanding and practicing your faith provides the bedrock foundation for your interaction with others.  Many faiths-Buddhist, Christian, and Moslem - have fundamental principles of concern and compassion.

3. VISION
One truth emerges from programs that are successful and those that are failures: success depends on empowering individuals, families, and communities to take responsibility for their own health.
Te following readings are recommended for your tool box: Pedagogy of the Oppressed by Paulo Freire (ISBN 618892077143), Jamkhed by Drs. Raj and Mabel Arole; the Jamkhed website (http://www.jamkhed.org.), and Training for Transformation (Ann Hope and Sally Timmel) (http://styluspub.com/books/book3700.html).  All promote a similar theme: development occurs when communities identify and solve their own problems.  Your role as a global health worker is to facilitate that process.



4. PARTNER
Choose a partner who has similar values and has the capacity to live in difficult situations and manage necessary separation.  (I was away for 8 months in 1977.)  After Thanksgiving, my wife, Dottie, will go with me to Nigeria to visit a nursery school she started in the slums of Lagos in 1968; the school is still running.  Empowering others has been a common goal of our marriage, both in the US and abroad.  

5. TEAM/FAMILY
Success in global health comes from an understanding of and a commitment to the team approach.  A colleague at the Tropical Institute of Community Health and Development in Kenya recently expressed it clearly, saying that "the driver and the blood bank technician are as important as the surgeon in successfully managing an obstetrical emergency."
Among my most cherished experiences are the unique times when my colleagues at work became a family.  Those are the times when the synergies of working together achieve far more than the individual parts, e.g., Smallpox Eradication in Bangladesh, 

6. #11 BUS
During an immunization course in Tinjin China, a Chinese colleague identified the #11 bus as the key to success in public health.  When challenged, he stood up on a chair and pointed to his two long legs - the #11 bus.
Time in the field-not time in the air-conditioned office or behind a computer screen-is what determines success or failure.

7. LISTEN
As we struggled to end smallpox transmission in Bangladesh, I visited a Bangladeshi Sanitary Inspector named Sabour in Mymensingh, along the Indian border.  He reported 17 smallpox outbreaks-11 of which had lasted more than 14 days.  With neighboring India smallpox free, and since cases more than 14 days were a containment failure, this was a disaster.  I asked Sabour what he was doing.  He reported that he was doing "everything the book said:" isolation, house guards, vaccination of all with in a half mile, searching all houses within 5 miles, and identifying and vaccinating all visitors. And then over a cup of tea, a big smile emerged:  "today I discovered why.  I was asking for visitors; they were not giving me the names of relatives who had come to visit because they didn't consider them to be visitors."  Adding a list of relatives to the protocol solved the problem.
The lesson here is the importance of providing those working at the field level with the indicators to measure their own performance. With those tools in hand, key barriers are identified and overcome.  Smallpox was eradicated because of individuals like Sabour, who spent 28 nights a month in the field for 4 years.

8. OPTIMISM
In October 1974, we had reduced the number of smallpox infected villages in Bangladesh to 89, and I predicted-in the press-eradication by December.  But then the two most heavily infected areas were flooded by the worst floods in 50 years.  People went into motion and, by May 1975, we had 1589 infected villages. We were all depressed and feared that we had lost the critical battle in global eradication.  My deputy, Rangaraj, an Indian physician paratrooper who had fought with Stillwell in Burma, kept us going with a daily cheer - "hang in there - keep fighting - it will be all right."  Several years later, I had tea with Rangaraj in Somalia and asked him how he could have been so optimistic.  His response shocked me - "I didn't think you had a chance in hell of succeeding, but I learned from my experience in Burma with Stilwell that if you ever thought you would not survive the next day of hell, you were dead."  
As I look at the hell of HIV/AIDS in Africa, I hear the voice of Rangaraj over my shoulder: "Hang in there - keep fighting - it will be all right."

9. OWNERSHIP
Over the years, I have emphasized the principles of community participation and community partnership.  In retrospect, those are the wrong words.  Experience in a CARE Water project in Homa Bay, Kenya in the summer of 2002 revealed the right words: community ownership.  Community ownership is, I believe, the single most important determinant of program effectiveness and sustainability.
We must always remember that the donor's priorities or even our own priorities may not always be the priorities of individuals, families, and communities.  Listening to and responding to community needs is the place to start.

10. SURVEILLANCE
I have given many speeches in my life time, but only one is remembered in its entirety.  At the close of a CCCD meeting in Swaziland in the 1980s, I stood up and said "Surveillance, Surveillance, Surveillance."  I then sat down.
Evidenced-based decision making separates the effective global health worker from the do-gooder.  If you can't measure it, you can't manage it.
That "you" refers not only to you, the international warriors for global health, but to those working at the community level.  This summer I sat down with Pamela, a community health worker in the Homa Bay Water Project in Kenya.  She showed me a wall chart with 10 circles.  Within each circle were symbols for important steps towards health:  latrines, water pot, dish rack, "Klorin," waste pit.  Her understanding of what was going on in each house enabled her to promote healthy behaviors.

POSTSCRIPT
Many of you who heard this speech in Philadelphia or who now read this on the web were part of that family that worked together, laughed together, cried together and, yes, partied together in health programs over the last 35 years.  It is in your names that I accept this award.  Thanks, "Hang in there - keep fighting - it will be all right."
For those starting out on a career in global health, one of the world's most rewarding (also frustrating) of all professions, I hope these guideposts will help you as you strive to bring health and hope to those in need.             